---

layout: post
tags : ["vim"]
title: "Musings on switching to Vim"
summary: "So I switched fully to (Neo)vim, here is what I think"
date: "2017-08-08"

---

As a self taught developer, I am always looking out for ways to improve my software dev kit and knowledge.
A big part of any developer dev kit is an editor.

My editor of choice has always been anything made by [Jetbrains][jetbrains].
I used to make use of PHPStorm - well that's the only sane IDE for PHP development.
I also used the 30 days trial for Rubymine earlier this year when I was searching for a new language to learn.
I ended up not learning Ruby and picked up [Go][go_tags] instead. Go being a new language didn't have much editor
support - compared to say Java or Python - but luckily Jetbrains were developing this IDE called Gogland.
Awesome, I got that installed.

But Gogland was a bit heavy and unstable. I decided to go back to Sublime text, it was blazingly fast but just too basic.
I heard good things about VS code - a friend uses this and it seems a little popular in the Go community.
I then tried it but did run into a problem which I concluded it being another of ___Microsoft's unending software mess___.
It was related to setting up a plugin for Go development. To be frank, I cannot remember the details of that issue as I wasn't
even keen on using a ___Microsoft___ product on my lovely [Elementary os][elementary].

So I went back to a terrain I used to know so well. Atom. I have a love-hate relationship with this editor.
The ___love___ part is that it was the editor I used to write the code that ended up being my first open source PR
and my first open source library.
The ___hate___ part is the same reason [I hate any other Electron app][flash_for_desktop].

I had run out of options. Then I ran into a post on `r/golang` that says something like ___Vim-go is gold___. I then visited `vim-go`'s github repo.
2 months later. I am sold and have made use of vim exclusively for all text/code editing ever since.

## My Early struggles

I struggled. A lot.

The first pain point was understanding modes. I would type about 4 characters and nothing would get printed to the screen
only to realize I was in normal mode. Damn, I would then have to press `i`.
Or if I did mistakenly press `I`, i would be editing the source code at some other place different from where I did intend to.

Or was it `hjkl` ? Holy cow. Even 2 months after, if you ask me which maps to a corresponding arrow key,
it would take me about a millisecond to answer that.
Although, muscle memory helps me a lot. I don't even have to ___remember which is which___, I just place my hands on the keyboard and navigate through.

Another thing I struggled with was productivity loss. I would spend time thinking about what command I was to type.

- `yy4jp5kdd`
- `dd4jp`

> Both commands actually do the same thing. Delete(cut) this line, go 4 line upwards and paste the text there.
> The first command copies the text, goes 4 lines up, paste then return to the line it copied the text from then delete.
> While the second one deletes the line immediately (___more like cut___), go 4 lines upwards then paste.

Or was it `16l` only to learn somewhere else you could use `lw` or just `w`.

Or God help you find that invisible character in your source code (maybe caused by a vim snippet or something). It always ruined my compilation.
I would end up switching to Sublime text to look for and delete it.

But like any other thing, it was a learning phase. I proceeded with great courage and determination. I then learnt a lot in the proceeding weeks but
was never confident I knew enough to get stuff done, so I kept Sublime text around. 2 months later, Vim (Neovim actually) is only editor installed
on my PC. I just couldn't stand Sublime text any much longer. <sup>0</sup>

Switching to Vim was even more enhanced by plugins that simulated features I was used to from Jetbrains and Atom. Here is a handful of them

- `scrooloose/nerdtree` - A file explorer on steroids.
- `tpope/vim-fugitive` - Everything you need to do with Git. This plugin is so sick, it made me appreciate the split diff UI mode on Github.
- `w0rp/ale` -  Linting on steroids. Shows you warnings and errors as you type and oh, Vim doesn't lag a bit.
- `airblade/vim-gitgutter` - Symbols for git diffs in files as you type.
- `Shougo/deoplete.nvim` - Autocompletion
- `Shougo/neosnippet` - Snippets.
- `simnalamburt/vim-mundo` - Local history for files. This is on par with that Local history feature from Jetbrains. I have this mapped to `<C-z>` like
regular undo.

With that said, I don't see myself making use of another editor in the nearest future.
Heck, I helped a cousin edit some file on LibreOffice the other day
and I literally was bleeding internally. Ok maybe I might use another but it has to be

- Another vim fork :)
- A Jetbrains IDE with vim mode.
- Emacs + Evil.


> PS : Checkout my [vim config file](https://github.com/adelowo/dotfiles/blob/master/nvim/init.vim).
> It is a little bit disorganized since I have been learning on the go but hey.

#### Footnotes

[0] - I learnt there is a Vim (vintage) mode in Sublime text though.


[jetbrains]: https://jetbrains.com
[go_tags]: /tags/#go
[elementary]: https://elementary.io
[flash_for_desktop]: https://josephg.com/blog/electron-is-flash-for-the-desktop/
